## Introduction

<!-- General introduction. -->

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) bacteremia is a common, life-threatening infection, arising through both community-acquired and healthcare-associated settings [@PMID:23663462; @PMID:22760291]. These infections are associated with poor outcomes, and 15–30% of patients fail treatment with anti-MRSA antibiotics despite these drugs' effectiveness _in vitro_ [@DOI:10.1086/423145]. Infections that resolve under anti-MRSA treatment can be designated antibiotic-resolving (ARMB) or antibiotic-persistent (APMB) MRSA bacteremia [CITE]. The limited predictive value of in vitro susceptibility indicates a need to better understand the determinants of infection course _in vivo_.

<!-- What is known about disease course. -->

Recent progress has been made in identifying determinants of MRSA infection outcome. Host factors appear to play an important role, as patient outcome is independent of strain susceptibility to vancomycin or daptomycin treatment [@DOI:10.1086/423145]. Several demographic and clinical factors are associated with outcome but are insufficiently predictive to determine outcome in individual patients [CITE]. Based upon the hypothesis that outcome is determined by the confluence of host, pathogen, and antibiotic features, we have previously undertaken broad molecular profiling to integrate the molecular differences of infection response [CITE]. Our systems-level analysis has previously identified genetic [@DOI:10.1073/pnas.1909849116], transcriptional [CITE], and cytokine [CITE Rossetti] predictors of SAB persistence. However, the extent to which these signatures operate as distinct molecular mechanisms of immune phenotypic response, or reflect a shared underlying molecular mechanism, is yet unclear. Furthermore, we surmised that patterns across these molecular features might refine improve predictions of outcome if they helped to refine shared molecular mechanisms.

<!-- Data fusion / tensor models -->

Factorization-based models offer a natural solution to identifying patterns across datasets and data types. Most generally, these methods identify a reduced set of matrices that, when recombined, approximate the original measurements. Doing so, when appropriately matched to the structure of the data, helps to visualize its variation, reduce noise, impute missing values, and reduce dimensionality. Principal components analysis and non-negative matrix factorization are just two examples widely applied with data in matrix form. When integrating data across additional dimensions, higher-order generalizations of these methods exist [@doi:10.1137/07070111X]. These types of models are naturally suited to combining different types of data measurements, as each data type can be aligned along a dimension representing different samples. For example, PARAFAC2 models are particularly effective in combining data of different types as they allow each dataset to have a shared dimension such as patient subjects but then vary in the number of measurements within each dataset [CITE].

<!-- Introduction to the paper. -->

Here, we use a tensor factorization approach to integrate the transcriptional and cytokine responses to MRSA infection. Data integration allows us to identify consistent patterns of immunologic response across both types of data. Specifically, we identify a distinct innate and adaptive immune signature, present in both types of data, that together predict disease outcome. The combined data model predicts outcome better than either data type on its own, and its predictive accuracy is validated in an independent cohort. In total, this provides an approach to identifying integrative signatures of clinical immune response and dysfunction.
