## Methods

### Patients and sample collection

The patients were selected from a prospectively enrolled via an informed consent process under the Duke Institutional Review Board (IRB) Protocol #Pro00008031 between 2007 and 2017.

The primary analysis included a total of 68 eligible adult patients diagnosed with a monomicrobial S. aureus bloodstream infection. Patients who died before being approached by a research staff member were enrolled under the IRB Notification of Decedent Research. A subsequent cohort of 80 patients was used for validation studies. Criteria for inclusion in this analysis were: individuals ≥ 18 years of age; culture-positive confirmed MRSA bacteremia; the MRSA isolate archived; intravenous VAN treatment; and clinical metadata available. Exclusion criteria included: MRSA culture-negative or lack of available isolate or clinical metadata; polymicrobial infection; antibiotic therapy other than VAN; neutropenia; outpatients or those ≤ 18 years of age. Plasma and serum samples were collected within 1-3 days of diagnosis of MRSA infection and stored at -800C in the Bloodstream Infections Biorepository (BSIB) at Duke University Medical Center (DUMC). Additionally, research staff collected demographic and clinical data on each enrolled patient and stored the data in an electronic data capture system, i.e. Microsoft Access 2016.

We conducted a prospective cohort study of hospitalized patients diagnosed with ARMB or APMB. APMB was defined as ≥ 5 consecutive days of MRSA bacteremia in patients receiving appropriate VAN treatment. Patients classified as APMB and ARMB were matched by stratified propensity score on age, sex, race, diabetes, dialysis, and presence of any indwelling device.

### Molecular analysis

#### Luminex-based cytokine measurement

Human 38-plex magnetic cytokine/chemokine kits (EMD Millipore, HCYTMAG-60K- PX38) were used per manufacturer’s instructions. The panel includes IL-1RA, IL-10, IL-1α, IL- 1β, IL-6, IFN-α2, TNF/TNF-α, TNF-β/LT-α, sCD40L, IL-12p40, IFN-γ, IL-12/IL-12p70, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, IL-9, IL-17A, GRO/CXCL1, IL-8/CXCL8, eotaxin/CCL11, MDC/CCL22, fractalkine/CX3CL1, IP-10/CXCL10, MCP-1/CCL2, MCP-3/CCL7, MIP-1α/CCL3, MIP-1β/CCL4, IL-2, IL-7, IL-15, GM-CSF, Flt-3L/CD135, G-CSF, IL-3, EGF, FGF-2, TGF-α, and VEGF. Fluorescence was quantified using a Luminex 200TM instrument. Cytokine/chemokine concentrations were calculated using Milliplex Analyst software version 4.2 (EMD Millipore). Luminex assay and analysis were performed by the UCLA Immune Assessment Core.

#### RNA-seq

Total RNA was isolated with the Qiagen RNA Blood kit, and quality control was performed with Nanodrop 8000 and Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100. Globin RNA was removed with the Life Technologies GLOBINCLEAR (human) kit. Libraries for RNA-seq were prepared with the KAPA Stranded mRNA-Seq Kit. The workflow consists of mRNA enrichment, complementary DNA (cDNA) generation, and end repair to generate blunt ends, A tailing, adaptor ligation, and PCR amplification. Different adaptors were used for multiplexing samples in 1 lane. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina Hiseq3000 for a single-read 50 run. Each sample gets an average of 15 million reads. Data quality check was done on Illumina SAV. Demultiplexing was performed with the Illumina Bcl2fastq2 v 2.17 program.

### Computational Analysis

#### Data Factorization

The data tensor was constructed by creating two matrix slices consisting of clinical cytokine measurements and RNA sequencing counts for all patients. The two slices were separately normalized prior to factorization. <!-- TODO: Insert short description of normalization here. --> PARAFAC2 decomposition was performed using the TensorLy Python package [TODO: CITE].

<!-- TODO: Add more about the math details of PARAFAC2. -->
