## Methods

### Patients and sample collection

This case-controlled study consisted of 58 SAB patients (28 APMB and 30 ARMB) propensity matched by sex, race, age, haemodialysis status, Type I diabetes, presence of an implantable device.  Details of clinical characteristics of study cohort are presented in Table 1. SAB cases were evaluated and consented for enrolment in the S. aureus Bacteremia Group (SABG) biorepository at Duke University Medical Centre (DUMC). Cases for the current study were carefully selected based on the following inclusion criteria: laboratory confirmed MRSA bacteremia; received appropriate vancomycin therapy; enrolled in the SABG study between 2007 and 2017 (to ensure contemporary medical practices). APMB was defined as patients had continuous MRSA positive blood cultures for at least 5 days after vancomycin antibiotic treatment [@DOI:10.1073/pnas.1909849116]; while ARMB patients had initial blood cultures that were positive for MRSA, but the subsequent blood cultures were negative.

### Molecular analysis

#### Luminex-based cytokine measurement

Human 38-plex magnetic cytokine/chemokine kits (EMD Millipore, HCYTMAG-60K- PX38) were used per manufacturer’s instructions. The panel includes IL-1RA, IL-10, IL-1α, IL- 1β, IL-6, IFN-α2, TNF/TNF-α, TNF-β/LT-α, sCD40L, IL-12p40, IFN-γ, IL-12/IL-12p70, IL-4, IL-5, IL-13, IL-9, IL-17A, GRO/CXCL1, IL-8/CXCL8, eotaxin/CCL11, MDC/CCL22, fractalkine/CX3CL1, IP-10/CXCL10, MCP-1/CCL2, MCP-3/CCL7, MIP-1α/CCL3, MIP-1β/CCL4, IL-2, IL-7, IL-15, GM-CSF, Flt-3L/CD135, G-CSF, IL-3, EGF, FGF-2, TGF-α, and VEGF. Fluorescence was quantified using a Luminex 200TM instrument. Cytokine/chemokine concentrations were calculated using Milliplex Analyst software version 4.2 (EMD Millipore). Luminex assay and analysis were performed by the UCLA Immune Assessment Core.

#### RNA sequencing, mapping, quantifications and quality control

Total RNA was isolated with Qiagen RNA Blood kit, and quality control was performed with Nanodrop 8000 and Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100. Globin RNA was removed with Life Technologies GLOBINCLEAR (human) kit. Libraries for RNA-Seq were prepared with KAPA Stranded mRNA-Seq Kit. The workflow consists of mRNA enrichment, cDNA generation, and end repair to generate blunt ends, A-tailing, adaptor ligation and PCR amplification. Different adaptors were used for multiplexing samples in one lane. Sequencing was performed on Illumina Hiseq3000 for a single read 50 run. Each sample generated an average of 15 million reads. Data quality check was done on Illumina SAV. Demultiplexing was performed with Illumina Bcl2fastq2 v 2.17 program.

### Computational Analysis

#### Total Matrix-Tensor Factorization

We decomposed the systems serology measurements into a reduced series of Kruskal-formatted factors. Tensor operations were defined using Tensorly [@arXiv:1610.09555]. To capture the structure of the data, where the majority of measurements were made for specific antigens, but gp120-associated antibody glycosylation was measured in an antigen-generic form, we separated these two types of data into a separate 3-mode tensor and matrix, with shared subject-dimension factors:

$$X_{antigen} \approx \sum_{r=1}^R a_r \circ b_r \circ c_r$$

$$X_{glycosylation} \approx \sum_{r=1}^R a_r \circ d_r$$
where $a_r$, $b_r$, and $c_r$ are vectors indicating variation along the subject, receptor, and antigen dimensions, respectively. $d_r$ is a vector indicating variation along glycan forms within the glycan matrix.

Decomposition was performed through an alternating least squares (ALS) scheme [@doi:10.1137/07070111X], in the same approach as we recently reported elsewhere [@DOI:10.1101/2021.01.03.425138]. Each least squares step was performed separately for each slice along a given mode, with missing values removed. While this made each iteration step much slower, convergence was much faster as a consequence of requiring fewer iterations. Missing values did not strictly follow a tensor slice pattern, and so alternative approaches such as a sampling Khatri-Rao product were disregarded as they would still require iterative filling [@doi:10.1137/17M1112303]. This strategy required many more iterations due to a high fraction of missing values (43%). The ALS iterations were repeated until the improvement in R2X over the last ten iterations was less than $1\times 10^{-7}$.

To enforce shared factors along the subject dimension, the antigen tensor and glycan matrix were concatenated after tensor unfolding. The Khatri-Rao product of the receptor and antigen factors was similarly concatenated to the glycan factors. The least-squares solution on this axis therefore solved for minimizing the squared error across both data compendiums. The other dimensions were solved using a standard ALS approach.

<!-- TODO: Write out equations for ALS and the shared dimension. -->

#### Reconstruction Fidelity

To calculate the fidelity of our factorization results, we calculated the percent variance explained. First, the total variance was calculated by summing the variance in both the antigen-specific tensor and glycan matrix:
$$v_{total} = \left \| X_{antigen}  \right \| + \left \| X_{glycosylation}  \right \|$$
Any missing values were ignored in the variance calculation throughout. Then, the remaining variance after taking the difference between the original data and its reconstruction was calculated:
$$v_{r,antigen} = \left \| X_{antigen} - \hat X_{antigen}  \right \|$$
An analogous equation was used for the glycan matrix. Finally, the fraction of variance explained was calculated:
$$R2X = 1 - \frac{v_{r,antigen} + v_{r,glycosylation}}{v_{total}}$$
Where indicated, this quantity was calculated for values left out to assess the fidelity of imputation. In these cases this quantity was only calculated on those left out values, and indicated as Q2X.

#### Gene expression deconvolution

Following the protocol of the R package "immunedeconv" [@PMID:31510660; @PMID:32124323], we used a matrix of TPM values as input to perform the deconvolution. The read counts per gene were normalized into transcripts per kilobase million (TPM) reads mapped for the human genes. For this analysis, we considered only genes with >10 counts per million in 10 or more samples as expressed and tested a total of 12,253 human genes (out of 58,870 human genes). Deconvolution was then performed using CIBERSORT using the LM22 signatures matrix file consisting of 547 genes that accurately distinguish 22 mature human hematopoietic populations isolated from peripheral blood or in vitro culture conditions, including seven T cell types, naive and memory B cells, plasma cells, NK cells, and myeloid subsets [@PMID:31510660].  
